Link: [https://arxiv.org/pdf/1706.03762](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1706.03762).						05/27/2026

The publication *“Attention is all you need”* is a major milestone in artificial intelligence and machine learning, where it expands on how to train a transformer using key concepts such as neural networks, multi-head attention blocks, feed forward networks, and more.  
	A transformer is composed of both an **encoder** and a **decoder**. An encoder transforms raw input data such as text, images, or audio into a compressed vector known as an **embedding**. Each token in the embedding space has a specific numerical representation, where words or values in the same taxonomy may have similar representations. On the other hand, a decoder is the inverse of the encoder. It takes an embedding from the encoder and, after some communication and computation, it returns an output that is both probabilistic (meaning that it returns the most likely value) and is in a human-readable or usable format, typically in the form of text or imagery.  
	One of the most important aspects of a transformer is **attention**, a mathematical method that allows a model to effectively “read” the input and allocate dynamic weights to each token, giving the model that ability to analyze context, sentiment, and prioritize certain tokens. An attention function maps a **query** and a pair of **keys** and **values** to an output. The query represents the information we are looking for, while the key is what each token can offer. The output is a weighted sum that tells the machine how relevant each token is. A higher score corresponds to more attention on that token. The attention that is discussed is called a **“scaled dot-product attention,”** where the output comes from the dot product between the query and the key. Then, it is divided by the square root of the values of a dimension, which is then parsed through a softmax function and multiplied by the actual data, which is denoted as value. In essence, we have our original data (V), which is modified by the output of our dot product (using Q and K).  
	Bridging on the concept of attention, we can examine **attention heads**. An attention head, on its own, is an independent attention mechanism that learns to focus on various relationships within the data, which in turn, from the context of all previous words, can have a different perspective from different heads of attention. This allows the model to dynamic and properly generate the correct content. Instead of doing attention once, transformers actually perform attention multiple times in parallel, or what we know as **multi-head attention**. By concatenating multiple heads of attention together, they can track subsections of the input, resulting in a better and more concise analysis.  
	Our encoding neglects one critical aspect: a **transformer** has no notion of order. For instance, the phrase “a dog bites a man” is no different from “a man bites a dog”. While they have the exact same tokens, their ordering greatly changes the meaning of the sentence. To resolve this issue, we use **positional encoding**, where there are two potential avenues: *absolute* positional encoding, where it tells the model the exact coordinate of the token, and *relative* positional encoding, where it tells the model how far tokens are from each other. By adding our token embedding and our positional encoding, we get an input representation, which is then parsed into our query, key, and value.  
	While attention heads gather the information, **feed forward networks** “think” about the inputs. It operates on each token individually, adding nonlinearity, briefly expanding and then compressing it, and returns higher-level abstractions.  
	We use learned embeddings to convert tokens to vectors with a declared dimension. The number of dimensions is divided equally between each head of attention. For example, if the dimension is 512 with 8 attention heads running in parallel, each head (and consequently Q, K, V) will be 64-dimensional.

Summary authored by *Justin Mo*. Contact: [justmo0225@gmail.com](mailto:justmo0225@gmail.com).